# Design

The system is implemented as an k8s operator using the
[operator-sdk](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) but is
deployed as a DaemonSet instead of Deployment with
[filtering](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/doc/user/event-filtering.md)
only events for the DaemonSet pod node.


# Development

## Local Kubernetes cluster

See [local virtualized cluster guide](docs/deployment-local-cluster.md) to learn
how to deploy a cluster that can be used to try kubernetes-nmstate, run e2e
tests and perform debugging.

## Building

```shell
# If pkg/apis/ has been changed, run generator to update client code
make gen-k8s gen-openapi

# Build handler operator (both its binary and docker image)
make handler
```

## Testing

```shell
# Static checking
make check

# Run unit tests
make test/unit

# Run e2e tests, you need a running k8s/openshift cluster with with kubernets-nmstate running.
make test/e2e

# Run tests matching the regex "NodeSelector"
make test/e2e E2E_TEST_ARGS='-ginkgo.focus=NodeSelector'

# Conversely, exclude tests that match the regex "Simple\ OVS*"
make test/e2e E2E_TEST_ARGS='--ginkgo.skip="Simple\ OVS*"'
```

## Publishing containers

```shell
# Push nmstate-handler container to remote registry
make push-handler
```

It is possible to adjust the built container images with the following
environment variables.

```shell
IMAGE_REGISTRY # quay.io
IMAGE_REPO # nmstate

HANDLER_IMAGE_NAME # kubernetes-nmstate-handler
HANDLER_IMAGE_TAG # latest
```

## Manifests

The operator `operator.yaml` manifest from the `deploy` folder is a template to
be able to replace the with correct docker image to use.

Everytime cluster-sync is called it will regenerate the operator yaml with
correct kubernets-nmstate-handler image and apply it.


# Open a Pull Request

kubernetes-nmstate generally follows the [standard github pull request
process](https://gist.github.com/Chaser324/ce0505fbed06b947d962), but there is a
layer of additional specific differences:

The first difference you'll see is that a bot will begin applying structured
labels to your PR.

The bot may also make some helpful suggestions for commands to run in your PR to
facilitate review. These `/command` options can be entered in comments to
trigger auto-labeling and notifications. Refer to its command reference
documentation.

Common new contributor PR issues are:

- Missing DCO sign-off:\
  Developers Certificate of Origin (DCO) Sign-off is a requirement for getting
  patches into the project (see [Developers Certificate of
  Origin](https://developercertificate.org/)). You can "sign" this certificate
  by including a line in the git commit of "Signed-off-by: Legal Name
  <email-address>". If you forgot to add the sign-off, you can also amend your
  commit with the sign-off: `git commit --amend -s`.

## Code Review

To make it easier for your PR to receive reviews, consider the reviewers will
need you to:

- Follow the project [coding
  conventions](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments).
- Write [good commit messages](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).
- Break large changes into a logical series of smaller patches which
  individually make easily understandable changes, and in aggregate solve a
  broader issue.

## Best Practices

- Write clear and meaningful git commit messages.
- If the PR will *completely* fix a specific issue, include `fixes #123` in the
  PR body (where `123` is the specific issue number the PR will fix. This will
  automatically close the issue when the PR is merged.
- Make sure you don't include `@mentions` or `fixes` keywords in your git commit
  messages. These should be included in the PR body instead.
- Make sure you include a clear and detailed PR description explaining the
  reasons for the changes, and ensuring there is sufficient information for the
  reviewer to understand your PR.


# Releasing

To cut a release, push images to quay and publish it on GitHub
the command `make release` do all this automatically, the version  is at
`version/version.go` and the description at `version/description`.

So the step would be:
 - Change version/version.go and versions/description
 - Create a PR to review it
 - Merge it to master
 - Call `make release` from master

The environment variable `GITHUB_TOKEN` is needed to publish at GitHub and it must
point to a token generated by github to access projects.

# CI infraestructure

- [prow](https://prow.apps.ovirt.org/)
- [flakefinder](https://storage.googleapis.com/kubevirt-prow/reports/flakefinder/nmstate/kubernetes-nmstate/index.html)
